Please.
Thank you. So, Mr. Henry, thank you very much
for attending today.
Um, you've had a letter from the committee,
you've re replied.
We've asked would you like to come and make any statements
and to have any questions from the committee to you.
So I'd appreciate it if you could perhaps, um, start, uh,
speaking to your letter and to what has happened.
Uh, tu Thank you Madam Chair, uh, members
of the committee, uh, for this opportunity
to present my case, uh, here to the Privileges Committee.
Uh, can I start by saying, um,
when I started here in 2014, the words
by Speaker Carter were very clear to me
and to all the members who started in that intake,
which was familiarize yourself with the McGee
and the rules of the house.
Uh, and, uh,
I've certainly made an effort in my time here
in Parliament to do that.
Uh, and in doing so, um, I am familiar
with the rules of the house.
So the first thing I say to the committee is
for breaking the rule of stepping away from my seat
and onto the floor of the debating chamber.
I apologize. I know the rule, uh, with respect to that.
Uh, and, uh, I knew in doing so
that I would be breaking that rule.
The second thing I'll say is, uh, for the haka performed,
uh, the first thing is that, um, I stand
by my actions of performing the haka that day.
And if I can offer some context, uh, which is well known
to the members of the committee.
Uh, this, from my perspective, was one
of the most divisive bills I've ever seen in my time
of 11 years in Parliament.
Uh, it was also a very heated debate in the house
for members who were there that day.
Uh, and I certainly was one
who was interjecting strongly throughout the contributions,
uh, of that bill on that particular day, uh, followed soon
after was the haka, uh, sorry, just before the haka.
Um, my colleague
and good friend, uh,
the honorable Blue Jackson had been ejected from the house.
Uh, and so, um, uh,
my passion towards seeing this bill defeated, um, I stand
by wholeheartedly
and perform the hka on the floor of the house.
The second thing to that point, uh, I'll add is
for the consideration of the committee
and indeed all members of the house, that
that wasn't my first hka.
I've performed on the floor of the house.
Uh, it's well known
to members when treaty settlements have
been considered in the house.
And upon the third reading,
and generally the first reading as well,
the gallery are invited to sing.
Uh, I have stepped out onto the floor during those occasions
to perform both WTA
and haka in my 11 time, 11 years, uh, here in the house.
Uh, so I leave those as context, uh, for the points
that I wish to make in front of the committee here today.
And just once again, finish by saying I am aware
of the rules and to this committee
and members of the house, I do sincerely apologize
and I'm open for questions. Manager. Thank
You, Ricardo.
Um, thank you for your contribution.
Um, some have labeled the haka, um, as the sign
to intimidate, but, um, others have also noted that
its use in school price giving
and other events to show respect.
What's your interpretation of the use of the haka
and its potential place in parliament in
relationship to its intent?
Uh, the first thing I'll say to that is, uh,
it's been well acknowledged by members across the house,
as well as the highest constitutional position
of the Governor General in speeches
on the throne from the throne, uh, that nati,
he here in Wellington, that particular ha is
of descent.
And so the performance of
that haka here in parliament seems fitting given, uh,
the man status that have in the district, in the,
in the region here of t Uh, a second to that is
I do, uh, appreciate the view
that this house should represent the people.
And at many occasions where we've all been at happy, sad,
uh, other occasions where the haah has been performed, it's,
uh, done with intent.
It's done to both celebrate to both pro, uh,
to both celebrate, celebrate and protest.
Um, but always done, uh, with the mana
and respect that comes with doing the haka
and what I've known and in my experiences
after the haka, despite how one might feel during
the performance of that haka, uh,
generally we all come together and, and, and,
and, you know, talk through, debate through
or discuss, uh, what we need to discuss together
to come together on a particular matter that includes, uh,
coming together for haka for a feast afterwards. Hmm.
Thank you. Yes.
Yes, sir. Um,
and you said that you didn't think
that members would be intimidated.
Did you think about this before your actions?
Um, I've never seen the haka as
purely intimidatory.
And what I mean by that is, um, one could argue that the,
this particular bill, uh, was designed to intimidate Maori
or certain communities, uh, in New Zealand here.
Uh, when I performed the haka, I've given the context, uh,
in the house about how heated that debate was,
how passionate that debate was, uh,
and how I stand by my point
of performing the haka on the floor of the chamber.
So in your response to the committee, you said that
that was spontaneous.
So if it was spontaneous, how could you claim,
how could you be sure that no members were intimidated?
Uh, well, spon spontaneity is exactly that spontaneity.
Um, I apologize if I couldn't do the round of the houses
and the members in to inform them, uh, of a potential haka
and whether or not, uh, and,
and with the intent of explaining to them, that is
not my intention to be, uh, inflammatory
or to be intimidating in any way, shape,
or form, spontaneity is exactly that.
Uh, and my consideration in performing the hka, uh,
took into consideration all of the context that I've already
provided, and that is well known to the members
of this committee and the house as a whole.
Uh, and I still maintain that the spontaneity of
that haka was performed, uh, in, uh,
direct opposition to this bill.
Ask Louise ab question. Thank you.
Um, so I just wanna be clear, you've, you've, um, apologized
for coming away from your seat,
but not apologizing for the haka.
Um, so in your study of Magee,
which you quite proudly said at the start,
where does the haka sit in Magee?
Where does haka sit? Sorry, In Magee,
In McGee? No,
what I spoke, when I spoke about familiarizing myself
with the rules, I knew that impeding
or impinging on the, uh, processes of the house,
in particular on the chamber floor, which is
what we're debating or discussing here at the moment.
Uh, it doesn't say haka,
but it does say impinging on the processes of the house.
And I appreciate, uh, that that's one
of the reasons why I've been summoned here, uh,
from the privileges committee.
So do you, uh, McGee does not refer to the Hagar.
So do you recognize that coming away from your seat, um,
does take a step towards other members in their space?
Uh, and that's why I apologize
for stepping onto the field.
Marina, you had a question. Thank you, Ms.
Um, in your, uh, response letter, you referred to,
um, the, not noticing straight away
that the speaker had stood,
because indeed he didn't stand straight away.
I was there that day. I remember how it happened.
And, and appreciate you just acknowledging that here.
So, and, and indeed many of your colleagues took
to their feet but did not leave.
So they weren't intimidated themselves,
but they were supporting your standard seems to me.
And then going forward, uh, now we know
that in standing orders, there is a request for Ana.
'cause now that's come up as a, so with all
of this, what does this mean?
Is this Ana?
And what does Ana mean now in the house, it used
to mean something that had a, it seems to me anyway, for
what I've picked up a sort of pa interpretation,
which isn't always the best.
Um, but in this context, now moving forward into the next,
you know, 20, 30 years, what might it mean?
Now I'm interested because standing orders now has been
required to understand this.
Mm-hmm. And hopefully be helpful. Mm-hmm.
Um, how's, how has say you in that regard?
Um, it's been well established,
certainly in my time. Yeah.
Hasn't been changed at all. No,
no, it hasn't been changed.
No, no, no. It hasn't been changed.
But I'm interested to,
because this, this comes out
of an expression of which is, you know, when when we,
when the house said yes to Maori,
Tik was always gonna follow.
So I'm, I'm interested, um, Madam Chair, if I may, just
to seek, uh, in, in your, in this context on this day,
what else was in play for you?
Uh, was, uh, the memory, the strong memory of,
of the Maori nation marching on Parliament.
Uh, and the expectation of the constituents that I represent
to ensure that, uh, our, our language, our culture,
and indeed our, in this instance, uh, is represented
and represented well.
Uh, and I feel I did that.
Uh, and, um, as I said, I stand by that.
The questions, um, about right on board, Mr.
And Peters, and then I'll come to you,
Ricardo, and come back to you.
Can I say this case, your case for this committee
is separated in my view from other cases coming before,
but can I ask a few questions?
Is t iwi by iwi the same?
Uh, the short answer is no,
Thanks.
Now, uh, you refer in your second paragraph,
second sentence, uh, one does not need
and one that needs no preparational rehearsal.
So I'm asking, it was a spontaneous,
It was spontaneous, and I've
provided the context for that spontaneity
and my actions in this instance.
Well, if was spontaneous then
in your opening statement you said
that you knew you were breaking the rule,
Uh, with respect to the rule.
Uh, I, as I've said, familiarized myself with the rules
of this house from my first day.
Uh, and I knew that stepping on the floor in any
circumstance to impinge the procedures
of the houses, breaking that rule
When you got, but now when you got up and
before you walked down, you didn't
Think, uh, that's part of my consideration for the
Ity. Yeah, I know. I mean,
and look, um, you do accept
that McGee's house rules
and precedents set out
that such a thing would require prior permission,
of which we've seen examples countless times. Mm-hmm.
Uh, yes. And I have seen those examples, um,
particular on treaty settlements.
Um, uh, uh, a question I put to, uh,
the committee would be in, in accepting
that the gallery can perform, does
that instantly suspend the rules on the floor of the house?
Um, my, my view is it doesn't do that.
And I've heard the speaker stand
and say, you now have permission to perform a,
not the rules of the house are suspended in order for you
to perform a way up to.
Yeah. Look, um, can you recall, 'cause it's a bit hazy,
but when you were got got to your feet, there was a number
of other people on their feet too, weren't they?
Correct. On your right.
That's, so you are there, they were on
their feet and speakers there,
Correct? Yeah.
So when you say the comment, no, don't do that.
I mean, I don't think any of us heard that.
No. Correct. We, we thought we heard it,
but we didn't know we heard it clearly.
Correct. And I, and I suspect by virtue of having seen it
so many times, played over and over on social media
and other platforms, I've heard it since.
But, uh, on the day I can't recall hearing it.
And throughout the entire debate, uh,
my eyes were predominantly either forward
or to my left, which is away from the speaker.
Can I just ask one last question?
You were actually saying that this complaint,
uh, if it had a construct, which would not include you.
Look, I think, I think, uh, there is a case
to be made here for the way that Tana does shape
how this house performs.
Um, with respect to the, my, uh,
dissension towards the bill
and my, uh, opposition towards this bill, it shouldn't come
as any surprise that I'd make a case
a strong one to oppose it.
Well, look, I can understand that, but can I ask this?
That's not the issue.
The issue is, what happened
was someone got up from this seat spontaneously, you say
it is impossible to do the haka and where you were standing.
So the front's only place you can go to. Correct.
It didn't go any further. Correct.
But that makes a, a distinction.
Correct. My action was
to simply step out from my step one step
is all I took. Steve
Ricardo. Thank you.
Alright, Ricardo,
What message would you like to send the committee
as we move forward with this process in relationship to
how we interpret how Tikanga
and the haka more specifically
is interpreted by other members?
Um, Uh, point of order.
Yes. Point of order. Greatest respect.
Witness is not here for that purpose.
No, that's right. I think we might
just stick to the actual
Point. Well, this is something
that the member
has mentioned previously.
And in order for us to adequately deliberate, it's important
for me to understand what the member wants from us as well.
Can I speak that point of order? Yes, you can.
You're honor this committee. 'cause you should understand
before you got here what your job was.
And if you didn't, somebody else
from your party should be here.
Fact of the matter, the witness is for specific purpose.
They were, you are trying to widen it.
And that, my view, ultra bias committee's rules,
I'll Leave it to the chair. Yeah.
So I'm, I'm ruling on this, that we ha are here
to deal with this particular matter of privilege, not
with the standing orders that they may
or may not be at another time.
It's very important we deal with this.
So could you ask another question that's more in keeping
with the actual, um, reason that the member is here?
Yes. I've noted, and in your letter you've noted, um,
that part of the language that was used, um, was the,
the fact that the haka was deemed intimidating.
Um, so as we move forward
and considered those words
that brought you here in the first place,
what would you like us to reflect on in relationship to,
for example, your actions,
how you see those reflecting tikanga
and how you would like us to interpret
that moving forward specifically to your actions?
Uh, I'm of the belief that the haka itself, uh,
is a part of this country, uh, in every single way.
And, uh, those who know, I go to the gym every day here
and as I walked to the gym, I heard, uh,
speaker Brownley speaking on a video to visitors
who came here and said
that our democracy in this institution is an unusual one in
that we might find our basis, uh, in Westminster,
but we do things a uniquely New Zealand way.
And that's where I think aka sit. Right.
The next question I have is Ji and then Scott.
Thank you. Um, so you've said that Haka performed, um,
all around the country during school prize giving.
So what's your intention behind your haka similar to
that offer, school prize giving,
because that is like celebration
because you're denying it was intimidation.
Uh, it's not just school prize givings.
It's done as an expression of, uh, the way one feels,
the way one once chooses to express themselves.
And I'm reminded of the word, and if anyone in the room here
or on the committee chooses to look up the word ro,
you'll see that it says, well,
roar actually means something far more than that.
It can mean an expression of love, an expression
of sadness, an expression of anger.
Yes. So
Think is more like, uh, kings bang grammar.
Uh, it, it's, that's exactly
where I've seen it performed with just as much passion.
Right. Um, thank, well, I'm an
Open grammar all boy. Oh,
Oh, Well, how, um,
Why didn't you go, I want to pick up if I
might, um, madam,
Oh, we're not gonna have any of
that nasty stuff for Canterbury.
Thank you. Please
Keep going. I wondered
if I might Madam Chair, just pick up on, um,
the line of questioning from the Deputy Prime Minister.
Um, deputy Prime Minister has indicated
that your actions were in some way separate
and different from other members who had significantly
advanced in close proximity to members
who were seated in the chamber during the debate
or during the taking of the vote.
Um, you've said in your letter
that your action in participating in the haka was
spontaneous, but I'm keen to know what it was
that was in your mind
that prevented you from joining the advanced party, so
to speak, because you did not advance further.
Yes. So what was it that was in your mind
that constrained you from doing that, and why?
A very good question, and thank you for the question.
Um, just recently was the National Kaka competition, te
of which I've been a participant and an mc.
I've lived and breathed haka and, and Maori tradition
and language all of my life.
The haka that I've been taught with association
with this particular haka requires you to stand in a
haka like stance, otherwise known as if I may demonstrate,
which is simply planting your two feet like this.
It doesn't require you to walk, doesn't require you
to jump this particular haka or form.
Like, this is how I've been taught and
therefore I planted my feet and stay there.
More question? Yes.
Think you've raised the question of Ka
Do you remember who it Was that, uh, funded
original commencement of ka? Oh,
Come on. If he,
if he's saying board relevance,
I think no consistency would be nice.
I think he might find that right on Western
Peter is trying to be helpful.
Um, you've, you've, you started out in your, uh,
opening statement with the, um,
describing that day and, and, and not an ordinary day.
This is not an ordinary day.
This is a day where this particular bill, which is designed
to all of the things that you talk about most divisive build
that, that it seems to me quite an exceptional
and extraordinary response.
That is a very Maori response.
That's what I think I'm hearing.
And I, so I'd be keen to hear more in that respect about
that and what was inside, not only in your mind,
but in your, Hmm.
About what that looks
and feels like on the day being the haka
expert that you are.
And then what it meant to have your, your, the rest
of the whanau on the floor with you.
Uh, I've provided the context, which you've, um,
touched on in your question.
Uh, and I do believe that in my time here, which is
only a minor 11 years dwarfed by many on this committee, uh,
I've never seen a bill like this.
And in fact, I think of some of the more
challenging bills in my time.
Bills such as the C-P-T-P-P, uh,
and other challenging bills in this house.
There is, I've never seen anything like this before.
And I will say that there's one thing more powerful than
doing a haka on your own is doing the
haka alongside your people.
And there is, without a shadow of a doubt,
that I could feel the presence
of the gallery doing the haka.
I could feel the presence of my colleagues on our,
certainly on our side of the house doing the haka too,
as well as the many I couldn't see,
which I'm sure we're watching from home.
Just want to clarify this
because you have already apologized
and you have said you understand the rules of the house.
But on the other hand, in your response to this question,
you have justified your actions.
So which side should we look, look at?
I think we should look at both. The rule is very clear.
Stepping on the floor and impinging the processes
of the house or the procedures
of the house is against the rules for that.
I apologize. Um,
but once again, I've already said I stand by my actions
of spontaneity to perform a haka
with the context given about the bill
for which we did the haka against.
Uh, and I continue to stand by that.
And if I can draw from a thread of the questions
that I've sensed here in my time in front of the committee,
there are bigger questions
and debates to be had about the rules
and the way that we conduct ourselves
or this house conducts itself.
Um, so in your letter you said that, um,
you apologize if there was disrespect there,
was there disrespect?
I certainly don't believe there was disrespect.
Um, and if I recall another instance
where I've been challenged, uh, in a haka, uh,
and the deputy prime minister will remember
this pretty clearly.
It was the, um, issue in Al
and I was the minister sent in to, to speak
with the wau and the locals there.
They certainly performed a rousing haka to me, not
to intimidate me, but certainly to express themselves.
Uh, and I continue to stand by, uh, my, my action here.
Can I ask you, did you see the speaker rise to his feet?
No, I didn't. Um, I mentioned for, for the entire debate,
my eyes were either straight ahead
or predominantly to the left, which is away from the speaker
who sits seated to my right for the entire
And Louis, and then Because your apology is
conditional, it says if there was disrespect
and now you're saying there was no disrespect.
Uh, well rules. He has actually apologized.
He apologized today for stepping away from his seat
and coming onto the floor. I made a note that's
After that we considered this.
Okay. And then Louise,
Thanks. I was just interested
in, you know,
you made the point clearly before about the speaker giving
permission when there is a wire from the gallery.
Um, so if you were facing away from the speaker,
you were clearly facing the gallery, um,
and the other members, uh, wouldn't it have been clear
to you that permission hadn't been granted for the gallery
to, to, to give AWAI or a haka at that point?
So you were in a influential position
when you knew permission had not
been granted from the gallery?
Correct. Did you not think that would lead to disorder
or some, uh, challenge of the house
and the house's proceedings?
Correct. I knew it would lead to that.
Uh, as, uh, uh, the member Kapa
has pointed out, that's both the spontaneity in the context
for which I performed like that I did.
Just quickly, can you recall a circumstance where
it was allowed, uh,
because it suit it seemed to be appropriate at the time
down in the ga down in the chamber, so to speak.
Are you aware of such a circumstance in the past,
Uh, where the haahs,
Not a haah, but something, a song? Mm,
Most definitely. And,
um, I've already mentioned the treaty settlement bills,
but there have been other significant occasions.
You are aware that when it comes to I mata I wasn't there
because I wasn't told it was happening.
No. Correct. Uh, Mr. Captain from me.
Correct. However, I was directed by the cabinet to attend.
Yes. I,
Third thing I was slightly historical. Yes.
Well, no, it was not important. Correct.
The third thing is can't why would people get
so hit up when they knew a piece
of legislation was dead on the water?
Exactly.
No. Was that relevant? That's,
that's just why would people,
You can ask your own question. Well, no,
I'm take the point of order. Are you
All right. Well then say point
of order because I'm not a mind reader.
Even if I do have other brilliant qualities. Okay.
Point, patience,
Point. What I know.
Say we his mind a mile off,
he would've issued the way he felt.
Did he just say to explain it?
That's all. We can ask a question about
How he felt, but not about How everyone else felt.
That's my point of all. Well, I'm talking to him. I said,
Okay, can we just come down comment? I didn't
Ask him to speak for everybody else like some other
party. I know I asked him to speak.
Okay. Mr. Uh, he got wound up,
wound up when he knew it was dead on the water.
Uh, very much in the same way that those who continue
to submit in the throngs
to the select committee about this matter, despite knowing
the position of, uh, the prime minister's made clear.
Uh, and it's with that same passion, I'll continue
to stand and oppose this bill. Okay. Until it is
Deep. One last thing. Have
you seen the old,
old ma expression about the wha
traveling out to meet the boat
Wolf coming out to meet the vote?
Yeah. Sounds quite good. Course to Congress. He's too young.
Was on that boat, Scott? Um,
Yes. I just
wanna come back to again, this matter
of spontaneity and what was in your mind
and why you didn't advance
further and all that sort of thing.
Because the, the context of
what was happening in the house at the time,
I think is relevant and important.
And what was happening at the time was the partial
completion of a party vote process.
Mm-hmm. So it wasn't the end of a debate.
It wasn't the beginning of the debate.
It wasn't the beginning of someone's speech
or the conclusion of someone's speech.
It wasn't the equivalent of a third reading.
It was halfway through a formal process
of the house, which of itself has its own rules,
precedent and procedures.
Mm. And I'm interested, uh, about, again, your, forgive me,
your state of mind at the time.
Yeah. I mean, you, you are, you are, as you say, a a member
of some experience 11 years in this house.
Um, so understand the process of a party vote, um, and
and the solemnity of that process.
Yeah. Uh, correct. And I do, I am aware of
that particular process, uh, the spontaneity
of someone leading that haka.
Uh, and me joining that haka, I think, um,
answers your question.
I've never seen an instance where, uh,
Richie McCall might lead the all black haka and say,
and some people say, we're not quite ready, uh,
honor, can we do that again?
So in the leadership that was taken by, uh, a fellow member
of the house to lead that haka, uh,
I felt it my duty to support.
So you were a follower of it?
I was a spontaneous kaka.
Will you lead us straight? Okay. Alright.
I guess it's, um, I think one
of the things I'd say ask you about Mr.
Henry's and he is, um, I've been, I've seen a lot
of emotional debates in parliament.
Mm-hmm. I wonder, have you thought
that other people might feel just
as passionately on other issues
and they do not take to the floor of the house
and which for you have apologized
and they do not, uh, encroach upon anything,
anyone else's space.
Mm-hmm. People naturally, this is a very,
very challenging times for people during these debates
and they can be very, very emotional within parties as well.
Actually, I've seen these conscience votes.
So I just wonder if you can think of any other time
that people might want to do this
and that that would be acceptable.
'cause I know you have already apologized
for stepping away from your seat and coming onto the floor,
but do you think there's other times that people might want
to and should be able to?
Yeah, look, I've, I've, I've, in my time here,
I experienced some very tense, uh, debates in the house.
Um, but I've never, I can't recall a time
where somebody's taken the action that I've taken.
Do you feel, and, and right on Winston Peters mentioned
it, do you really feel that at that time when this was,
this vote was happening?
So it's a voting process, not a debate that, um,
that you were interfering with that vote in some way?
And do you feel that the, um, when you think back to it,
do you realize that that was considered by many people
as being quite intimidatory
and, um, during that voting process where even
members cannot even shout out a little bit of an interject?
It's absolutely in dead silence.
So do you realize how important that was?
Yes. And I accept that in stepping onto the floor
and impinging on that process.
Uh, I'm culpable. Okay.
Only one other question. Yes, of course.
You, it's about the time
because we don't keep time, uh, then a whole lot of people's
diaries and the staff diary goes right out the window.
Uh, and what I'm saying is that you've been
to the Maori Sports Awards
and everything's right on clock
until they get up and all do there.
Why out on the full hundred jars
and all of a sudden you can see whatever plans you had
for your taxi, you can add another hour and a half that
and everything else that goes to hay.
If you're looking for the plane, you can forget that. Yeah.
I'm just asking for consideration, not just what your,
your thoughts are, but you can see how quickly, if that was
to happen too many times, then the
parliamentary schedule would be hayworth.
No. Correct. Yeah. Okay.
Does anyone have any other questions?
Any members of the committee? Thank you.
And Mr. Henry, did you wanna make any
other statements to us?
I need to thank that. I need to thank the committee
for your time and consideration of
My case. And, and
thank you. And I'd like to thank you
for coming along today and also for your apology
for stepping away from your seat and coming onto the floor.
Uh, and I'd also like to say thank you for the, um,
the considered letter you sent us.
Although I don't think it's necessary to mention
a complaint might be near identical
letter and things like that.
We don't do that. We treat every complaint
seriously and every letter.
No problem. So thank you very much.
We can clear the gallery.
I feel like I really wanted to say that.